How One Super Bowl Player Turned His Biggest Challenge Into A Strength by Jordan Schultz:

Derrick Coleman wasn't supposed to be here.

It wasn't because the 23-year-old Coleman, who plays fullback for the Seattle Seahawks, wasn't good enough. It was because offensive deaf players simply hadn't existed in the NFL before his arrival. But on Dec. 22, 2013, Coleman caught a ricocheted pass from quarterback Russell Wilson while facing the New Orleans Saints, scoring his first NFL touchdown. The crowd went crazy for one of the wildest plays of the season. 

If there was any remaining doubt about whether a deaf player could thrive at the highest level of pro football, it was quelled. Coleman, in turn, cemented himself as a valuable member of the Seahawks -- and not just an uplifting story. On Feb 2., he'll take history a step further when he plays in the Super Bowl against Denver, as he continues his first season as the first legally deaf person to play offense in the NFL. (The very first deaf player, Bonnie Sloan, played defensive tackle for the St. Louis Cardinals during the 1973 season.)

"My biggest challenge is to persuade people [with] that perception that if I can't hear, how am I going to be able to do different things?" Coleman tells The Huffington Post. "That perception is not true. Basically, it's not real. We can do everything you guys can, probably more. Just because we have hearing aids doesn’t mean anything. There are a lot of doubts in people's minds. ... At the end of the day, it's worth every second disappointing [those doubtful] people.“

Growing up in Fullerton, Calif., Coleman's football career got off to a frustrating start. Playing in the seventh grade, his hearing aids would keep falling out after getting hit. And when he got sweaty, they didn't work well. Coleman and his mom devised a solution of wearing two skull caps -- something he still does today. In high school, his talent was clear to recruiters, and he accepted a scholarship offer to start at nearby UCLA.

Coleman had a terrific four-year career at the school, only to go undrafted in 2012 after being invited to the NFL Draft Scouting Combine -- leaving some experts wondering if general managers and teams were hesitant to select a deaf player. After eventually signing as an undrafted free agent with Minnesota, Coleman was cut. Undeterred, he went back to work, earning a contract with the Seahawks and making the 53-man roster in 2013.

Coleman, who both reads lips and uses hearing aids on and off the field, remained undaunted. He makes it a point to keep his helmet lowest in the huddle, so that he can use his hearing aids to hear the play from quarterback Russell Wilson, and constantly stays close to offensive coordinator Darrell Bevell on the sidelines. 

In addition to his NFL career, Coleman takes time to speak to young children about achieving success despite obstacles. "When people tell me I can't do something," he says, "I'm going to work hard to do it.“

It's that doubt, he says, that is difficult. "Those are where the biggest challenges are," he says. "People don't really understand you." Coleman tries to impart this to kids in his talks, he says.

Coleman has also made it clear that his deafness is neither an excuse nor a crutch. He's quick to point out that if he misinterprets a play, it wasn't because he didn't understand it, but rather because he didn't know where he was supposed to be. 

"I don't ever use my hearing as an excuse," he says. 

Coleman is young enough in his NFL career that it's hard to predict how his future will unfold, but there's no doubt he will continue to inspire fans and teammates as he proves that being deaf isn't something to "overcome" -- it can be an advantage when it comes to perseverance.
 
"I've got to work extra hard," he says. "If you really want something, you're going to work extra hard already. No matter what the obstacle is -- hearing loss, or you can't speak, or whatever the problem is -- there’s always a way, and you can always go for your dream or whatever you want to do.“

Oh, and if his football career doesn't work out? Coleman says he'd lean on his degree in political science, either to enter the police academy or attend law school. At this point, it would be foolish to think that his hearing, and not his perseverance and work ethic, would set him apart in those fields either.


Do Analytics Take the Fun Out of Sports? A Dispatch From Sloan by Andy Glockner

Only at the Sloan Sports Analytics Conference would the late addition of Edward Tufte, Yale professor and data visualization expert, cause considerable buzz on a Friday night. The following afternoon, during the early part of his lecture, Tufte uncorked an axiom that could double as the conference’s mantra.

“Don’t let people tell you analytics are reductionist and take the joy out of sports,” he intoned. “They mostly just take the stupidity out of sports.”

Wanting to be really smart about sports is what led to the conference’s creation in 2007, and the ongoing push led by Big Data drives its evolution, even as corporate interests take further hold of the event. This year’s conference of over 2,000 attendees was enjoyable and efficiently run, albeit far removed from its humble roots planted in MIT’s labyrinthine halls seven years ago.

Today’s version feels as much like an Apple product launch or fancy film festival as an academic discussion, and sponsor involvement harmed the quality of some of this year’s discussion panels.

There is no understating the event’s collective intellect and thirst for new knowledge, though. Some of the research papers presented made rocket science seem facile. Tech companies hawked systems that track player movement, speed, optimal workloads, energy usage and whatever other physiology metrics are needed to gain an edge in today’s sports world. Front office bigwigs mingled with other industry insiders in the hallways of the Hynes Conference Center and at bars and restaurants across downtown Boston.

Sloan is great fun, but it’s also the ultimate insiders’ party. The true spirit of the conference — the work being done and conversed about — is not for the common sports fan, but the overall culture that’s drifted down to fans is having a marked impact on fandom.

“There’s a difference between analytics for teams and franchises, and analytics for media and fans, and I think that’s a useful division,” said Harvard professor and Grantland contributor Kirk Goldsberry, an expert in data visualization who presented a research paper at the conference. “Sometimes, we want to know what the optimal batting order for the Oakland A’s is, other times we just want to understand the performance we get to watch a little better, and batting average has helped us do that.”

“So analytics for fans, I would say it helps us enjoy the game better, it helps us watch the game better,” Goldsberry added. “It helps us quantify certain things about performers or teams that help us enrich the experience of being a fan.”

The sports industry needs to do better to quantify how much of Goldsberry’s last thought is true, and how much of a chasm exists between where franchises are pushing the analytics envelope and what’s advantageous for fans to consume. TV money is the fuel for major sports leagues in this country, but it’s the viewers — the fans — that help define the value of those deals (and pay for them through their cable bills), and all leagues are facing challenges in keeping those fans interested in their products.

MLB has an ongoing aging audience issue. The NFL is having a hard time making the in-stadium experience good enough. At Sloan, new NBA commissioner Adam Silver said the league was struggling to maintain the interest of younger viewers distracted by second screens, and that 40 percent of team revenues come from arena operations. If fans aren’t actually enjoying sports as much, they eventually won’t be attending or watching games as much, and that’s a problem.

If sports’ “datafication” is part of that issue, than the leagues need to figure out a way to bridge it.

The Knicks have become an easy punching bag because of curious management decisions and a lack of on-court success, but they also are a prime example of how fans’ greater understanding of the analytics of sports is changing the way fans consume sports. Instead of Carmelo Anthony being feted for his scoring prowess and overall individual excellence this season, the discussion about him surrounds whether he’s good enough to be the best player on a title team (he’s not, based on wins produced per 48 minutes) and related salary cap concerns.

Likewise, Knicks brass is pilloried for (among many other things) burning first-round draft picks in trades because fans now understand the inherent value of those picks, especially for a capped-out team.

“The more that I learn about sports, as much as it helps me understand them and makes me as an individual smarter about the games I love so much, I have to say I do sometimes find there’s conflict with enjoying the games,” said Will Leitch, who writes for the website Sports on Earth.

It’s not just that the Knicks are infuriatingly bad. It’s how and why they’re bad that’s inflaming their fans. That makes the relationship between fan and team more tenuous, even if (or especially because) fans don’t have access to the full array of internal dynamics underscoring decisions made by the franchise.

“The experience of being a fan is evolving, just like the experience of everything is evolving very quickly right now, and it shares a lot with society at large,” Goldsberry said. “Sort of quantitative, sort of data-obsessed, and sports is a reflection of that.”

Leagues and teams will continue to use technological advances to get smarter about how to re-sell their product to fans, but will that lead to fans actually enjoying the product more? As conference co-founder and Houston Rockets general manager Daryl Morey said pointedly Friday afternoon between panels, sports teams are “obviously, an entertainment business first.” For all the bells and whistles in modern stadiums and arenas, the competition is still a primer driver in sports interest, and within that, the magic that creates memories that last.

Everyone remembers Kirk Gibson’s home run to beat the A’s in Game 1 of the 1988 World Series. No one at the time wondered what his OPS was against relievers in that spot. Today? There would be heated exchanges on Twitter about that at-bat, probably while Gibson was still rounding the bases and pumping his arm.

As more and more fans cross the analytics bridge, there may not be a way back. It’s getting harder to understand sports and still enjoy the games solely for the thrill of competition. As FiveThirtyEight founder Nate Silver noted on Friday, “it’s very dangerous to suggest that keeping people ignorant is a good thing,” but do we, as fans, now know too much for our own enjoyment?