Nation Back On Board With SeaWorld Following Awesome Orca Trick:

WASHINGTON—Ending their intensifying tide of criticism over the marine park’s unethical treatment of animals and other disturbing practices documented in the 2013 documentary Blackfish, Americans across the nation announced this week that they were “totally back on board” with SeaWorld after seeing an awesome and absolutely can’t-miss orca trick.

“I realize that, in the past, I have expressed strong disapproval regarding SeaWorld’s inhumane and aggressive business practices, and I have urged on numerous occasions that measures be taken to curb and police these practices—but, holy shit, what that orca just did was amazing,” said Bethesda, MD resident Jennifer Carr, echoing sounds of delight from millions of awed Americans after 6,200-pound orca Kayla did a reverse breach during the SeaWorld Orlando show “Believe.” “At first the water is completely still and you’re thinking, ‘Where’s the orca?’ Then all of a sudden she just jumps 20 feet and does a sweet backflip back into the water. It was incredible. I mean, what a show.”

“The best part was the splash—it was huge!” Carr added. “Hell, sign me up, SeaWorld, because I am all in!”

Radically reversing months of intense backlash over the marine park’s care and training of dozens of orca whales in captivity, Americans across the nation confirmed that “all bets were off now” and that they needed to get to SeaWorld as soon as possible if they wanted to see Kayla do another “crazy, sick-as-hell” trick.

In particular, millions of citizens confirmed that in addition to watching Kayla do another backflip out of her tank, they were excited to see her get more fish from her trainer and smile another big, happy smile.

If they were lucky, Americans confirmed, they may get to see two orcas do a flip at the same time, which would be “seriously insane.”

“What can I say? I had SeaWorld all wrong—I had myself convinced they were some sort of exploitative company that abused animals in the pursuit of cheap thrills for tourists, but then I saw that orca make a big wave by slapping the water with his fin and I was like, ‘Hold the phone, I need to see that again,’” environmental reporter Craig Edmonds said while imitating the whale’s motion with his arms. “How do they even learn that stuff? It’s incredible. All I know is there’d better be more where that came from, because you have most definitely won yourself a new fan, SeaWorld.”

According to a recent survey, when reminded of the recent controversy surrounding the documented physical and emotional dangers of producing orca shows, 88 percent of Americans responded, “Granted, but did you see how high that orca got? She must’ve been two feet up in the air!” In addition, more than 90 percent of Americans said that they were “highly disappointed” they didn’t get to see the whales come totally out of the water and squirt audience members with their blowholes, while an additional 70 percent said the music should have been even louder because it made the whole routine “way more badass.”

Two in three Americans also reported that, moving forward, they’d like to see whales do two flips in a row instead of one.

“Sometimes one of the trainers will swim with them or even ride on one of them like they’re a surfboard, which is the fucking best, because how cool would that be to ride an orca like a surfboard?” said marine biologist Jackson Cahn, adding that he is officially renouncing his campaign urging the government to take legal action against SeaWorld. “Man, I wish I could ride one. I’m gonna go down to Orlando and try to touch one for sure.”

“I mean, all in all, SeaWorld is a pretty magical place when you think about it,” he added.


Francis Ford Coppola Reveals Every ‘Godfather’ Film Took Place In Same Narrative World

LOS ANGELES—Saying that he always intended for the films’ events to fit into a single linear timeline, director Francis Ford Coppola revealed in an interview this week that The Godfather, The Godfather Part II, and The Godfather Part III all took place within the same narrative universe.

The 74-year-old auteur explained that although each film can be appreciated as a stand-alone project, he in fact directed the movies with the conscious goal of weaving all three together into one cohesive world, dropping in subtle clues throughout to suggest that certain details and even entire story arcs within the movies were connected.

“Observant fans sometimes point out that a character named Michael Corleone appears in all three movies and that he’s played by Al Pacino each time, and I can assure you that’s no coincidence,” said Coppola, who noted that “all the puzzle pieces are there” for anyone who looks hard enough at the three motion pictures. “In fact, those aren’t three different people, but rather one character who appears three times. Michael in New York in the first film, Michael in Lake Tahoe in the second one, then Michael back in Manhattan in the third—they’re the very same man.”

“I did a similar thing having Carlo’s death in The Godfather carry over into the next two films,” Coppola continued. “You’ll notice he doesn’t show up in any of the others. That’s because he’s still dead in this one continuous storyline. Meanwhile, Connie is his widow, which is me kind of winking at the opening wedding scene with her and Carlo from the first film. It’s subtle, but once you pick up on a detail like this, you’ll start to notice many other little connections.”

Coppola said that once he conceived of the idea of placing the movies in the same universe, he made a point of theatrically hinting at the web of intersections between all three. In addition to keeping the same characters from movie to movie, Coppola noted that viewers who pay close attention can catch other continuities among the three works, from the music playing in the background, to common phrases and manners of speech, right down to the titles of the films themselves.

Indeed, rather than viewing them as separate tales of organized crime in America, Coppola said he would prefer that people instead consider The Godfather, The Godfather Part II, and The Godfather Part III as a unified trilogy, or saga, portraying the story of a single Mafia family over time.

Over the entire course of production, however, Coppola admitted that keeping the single interconnected world consistent became more of a challenge, especially in the third film—which he said was meant to be the “final” movie in the Godfather universe, temporally speaking—as it required viewers to make the complex logical leap of recognizing that the crime family depicted in the late 1970s was still the same crime family from the 1940s and 1950s from the earlier films.

“Basically, all the people with the last name Corleone who appear in the films are supposed to be related to each other,” said Coppola, recalling how during production he actually took the time to painstakingly map out the entire fictitious Corleone family tree that runs through all three projects. “For instance, Santino Jr. from the third film is the grandson of Vito from the first film, played by Marlon Brando, who is meant to be an older version of Robert de Niro’s character of Vito Corleone from the second film. It sounds confusing, but believe me, this is something we actually planned out.”

“For example, if you pay close attention, Marlon and Robert never appear on screen together,” he added. “That may seem trivial at first, but then it hits you: they’re playing the same person but at different ages.”

Noting that the nods to a common narrative were “Easter eggs” intended “only for the real diehards,” Coppola emphasized that the movies still held up individually, though he assured audiences that, after several viewings, many of them would pick up on details such as the fact that almost every character in the three films has ties to the Sicilian Mafia.

“We planned the films with the big picture in mind, but we always tried not to spell it out so much that it became a gimmick, and instead left it to fans to discover the connections themselves,” the writer-director said. “I always hoped that when people took a step back, they’d come to see how these three films sort of mesh together—how, if you want to think of it in this way, they are actually just one long story made up of three parts.”

“Fans shouldn’t get too carried away, though, and look for elements of The Godfather in other movies I’ve worked on,” continued Coppola, confirming that the Godfather storyline is only limited to the three films with Godfather in their name. “For example, Apocalypse Now is a film I made that’s not part of the Godfather universe, which I tried to emphasize by not having Robert Duvall’s character Bill Kilgore mention the Mafia—just like Tom Hagen never mentions Vietnam. I was very careful about that kind of stuff.”

Coppola did note, however, that Fredo Corleone from the first Godfather and Fredo Corleone from the second were supposed to be entirely different characters, and admitted that the repeated name was an error he noticed only after the film’s release.