Stocks End Broadly Lower: Weak China Data Sparks Selloff in Riskier Assets:

Stocks suffered broad declines as weak data out of China spooked investors, triggering a flight out of riskier assets. 

The increase in market volatility, which included sharp selloffs in emerging markets and the biggest tumble in Argentina's currency in over a decade, came as U.S. stocks has struggled in recent weeks to regain the upward momentum seen at the end of 2013. 

On Thursday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average slid 175.99 points, or 1.1%, to 16197.35, the lowest close since Dec. 19.

The S&P 500 index shed 16.40 points, or 0.9%, to 1828.46, and the Nasdaq Composite Index dropped 24.13 points, or 0.6%, to 4218.87. Materials and financials led declines in all 10 of the S&P 500 sectors.

The S&P 500 ended the session 1.1% below its Jan. 15 record-high close. 

Data showing China's manufacturing activity contracted in January sparked worries that the recent slowing momentum in the world's second-largest economy is carrying over into the new year.

That triggered a selloff in riskier emerging-market shares and currencies, and helped bolster prices of Treasurys and gold, which are viewed as safe-haven assets.

"We had some really weak data out of China, and that's scaring people," said Ian Winer, director of equity trading at Wedbush Securities. He said that since the global rally in equities is predicated on global economic growth, "if you get weakness [in China], it's something [stock] bulls have to question.“

The iShares MSCI Emerging Markets exchange-traded fund tumbled 2.5% to the lowest level since September 2013.

Several emerging-market currencies also sold off sharply in unison. The Argentine peso suffered the biggest one-day drop against the dollar in a decade, as Argentina faces heightened concerns about its own dwindling foreign currency reserves. In addition, the Turkish lira sank to another record low against the U.S. dollar. The lira tumbled even after Turkey's central bank intervened directly in currency markets for the first time in two years to slow its fall, raising questions about the central bank's ability to fight currency losses.

The lack of confidence spilled over into other emerging-market currencies, with the Russian ruble and South African rand dropping to multiyear lows against the greenback.

"China is still the growth engine of the global economy," said Chris Gaffney, senior market strategist with EverBank Wealth Management, which manages money across asset classes for high-net-worth individuals. "The [currency] sell-off is the result of worries about China's growth, and that's also leading to broader stock-market declines." 

Meanwhile, Treasury prices rallied, with the yield on the 10-year Treasury note settling at 2.774%, the lowest seen since Dec. 3. Yields fall as Treasury prices rise. Front-month January gold futures ran up 1.9% to a two-month high of $1,262.60 an ounce.

The attention placed on China and its effect on global risk assets marks a sudden change for investors, who have grown accustomed to focusing on U.S. corporate earnings.

"This is the first time in many weeks that we've seen this kind of across-the-board volatility," said Adam Grimes, chief investment officer at Waverly Advisors, which provides tactical research and advisory services to traders and money managers. "There is a clear theme here, that the market doesn't like risk today." 

Mr. Grimes added that while the selloffs in emerging-market currencies have his immediate attention, in the context of the bigger picture for stocks, he believes nothing has changed.

"If this continued for two to three days, then we might be rolling over into a bigger-scale pullback," Mr. Grimes said. But for anyone with a more than one-week view, "this is nothing; it's still business as usual," he said.

In corporate news, U.S.-listed shares of Finland's Nokia NOK1V.HE -10.66% slumped 8.7% after the company said handset sales declined in the fourth quarter. Nokia is expected to transfer its handset business this quarter to Microsoft MSFT +3.44% this quarter. Microsoft shares edged up 0.4%. 

Also in the Dow, McDonald's reported flat fourth-quarter earnings and a 0.1% drop in global same-store sales, hurt by a 1.4% decline in U.S. sales.

Netflix NFLX +0.24% surged 16% after the provider of streaming videos reported late Wednesday earnings and revenue above analyst forecasts. Leading up to results, the stock had declined 9.4% in the year to date.

Economic data were mixed. Weekly jobless claims edged up slightly less than forecast, while sales of existing homes increased less than expected.

In Europe, the Stoxx Europe 600 lost 1%, pulling back from a six-year high, as the weak Chinese data overshadowed data showing a pickup in activity in the euro zone.

Asian markets fell on the back of the weak Chinese data. China's Shanghai Composite shed 0.5%, after running up 3% over the previous two sessions.